---
layout: post
title: 03 - Jupyter notebooks
image: /talks/02_virtualenv/virtualenv.png
tags: [python]
---

Jupyter notebooks

* synchronize dependencies (work in teams & multiple workstations)
* Allows to manage and distribute all required project dependencies easily with a given projects (python version and packages)
* Integration with existing development tools (IDEs like pycharm) 




## Setup
The notebook can be easily installed via pip. The notebook uses a kernel to execute the commands.

```
workon itbtechtalks
(itbtechtalks) pip install -r requirements.txt
(itbtechtalks) pip install jupyter jupyterlab
```
In addition we install our virtualenv as a kernel for the notebook

```
(itbtechtalks) ipython kernel install --user --name=itbtechtalks
```

The jupyter notebook can than be started with
```
jupyter notebook
```

An alternative frontend is the jupyter lab which provides very similar functionality but with many additional features.
```
jupyter lab
```





```
python --version
pip --version
```

In addition `virtualenv` and `virtualenvwrapper` are required which can be installed via
```
pip install virtualenv virtualenvwrapper
```

`virtualenv` is a tool to create isolated Python environments. virtualenv creates a folder which contains all the necessary executables to use the packages that a Python project would need.
`virtualenvwrapper` simplifies working with virtual environments.

## Virtual Environments
### Create virtual environment
The first step is to create a new virtual environment. This generates a python executable and environment in a box isolated from the global python environment
```
mkvirtualenv itbtechtalks --python=python3
```

### List the dependencies
```
(itbtechtalks) pip list | less
(itbtechtalks) lssitepackages
```

### Install dependencies and requirements.txt
Now we try to run a script (Lorenz simulation)
```
(itbtechtalks) nano simulation.py
(itbtechtalks) python simulation.py
```
But some dependencies are missing
```
Traceback (most recent call last):
  File "simulation.py", line 5, in <module>
    import numpy as np
ImportError: No module named 'numpy'

```
We can install dependencies in the virtual environment via
```
(itbtechtalks) pip install numpy
```

But still dependencies are missing
```
(itbtechtalks) python simulation.py
```

Luckily the full set dependencies/requirements were provided which the scripts needs.
So we can easily setup our virtual environment with the dependencies.
```
(itbtechtalks) nano requirements.txt
(itbtechtalks) pip install -r requirements.txt
```
It is the standard to list dependencies in a `requirements.txt` which can be used to setup the virtual environment.


### Deactivate & reactiveate
``` 
(itbtechtalks) deactive
(itbtechtalks) workon limax
(limax) workon itbtechtalks
```

### Delete virtual environment
```
(itbtechtalks) deactivate
rmvirtualenv itbtechtalks
```

## Resources

* Guide to pipenv and Virtual Environments 
http://docs.python-guide.org/en/latest/dev/virtualenvs/
* virtualenvwrapper
https://virtualenvwrapper.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
* virtualenv and pip
https://www.slideshare.net/ryan_blunden/virtualenv-and-pip-isolated-python-environm
ents
